
MC. What sort of evidence would falsify the statement "All flowering plants reproduce sexually"?

* A. A flowering plant that does not reproduce sexually
B. A non-flowering plant that does not reproduce sexually
C. A non-flowering plant that does reproduce sexually
D. A slice of pizza
E. Either A or C

Use this information for the next two questions.  A famous experiment compared bacterial growth in broth that was boiled in short-necked flasks and swan-necked flasks.  Bacteria grew in the short-necked, but not in the swan-necked, flasks.

MC. What is your interpretation of this result?

A. Bacteria are spontaneously generated in the short-necked flasks
B. Some bacteria survive boiling and grow in the short-necked flasks
* C. Bacteria arrive from the environment and grow in the short-necked flasks, but are blocked from entering the swan-necked flasks
D. Bacteria are adapted to grow in short-necked flasks.

MC.  Assume the experiment above was done carefully and correctly, as described.  What is a possible objection to reaching the conclusion above based only on this experiment?

A. The experimenter may have overheated the flasks
B. The experimenter may not have allowed enough time for spontaneous generation to occur
C. The right kind of bacteria may not be present in the laboratory environment
* D. Spontaneous generation may require free air flow, which may have been blocked by the swan-necked flasks
E. The broth may not have been nutritious enough

MC. A researcher wants to train birds to jump and to peck in response to different stimuli.  Which of the following strategies is most likely to be successful?

A. Reward the birds with food for displaying desired behaviors.
B. Punish the birds with electric shocks when they fail to display desired behaviors.
C. Reward the birds when they jump appropriately, and punish them when they fail to peck appropriately.
* D. Reward the birds when they peck appropriately, and punish them when they fail to jump appropriately.
E. Put the birds in a lecture hall, and _tell_ them what to do, loudly and with large arm gestures.


MC.  Claytonia virginica is a woodland spring herb with flowers that vary from white to pale pink to bright pink. The slugs which damage the plants prefer to eat pink-flowering over white-flowering plants.  The bees that pollinate this plant prefer also prefer pink to white flowers, meaning that Claytonia with pink flowers reproduce more effectively, if they survive the slugs.  A researcher observes that the percentage of different flower colors remains stable in the study population from year to year. If the researcher removes all slugs from the study population, what do you expect to happen to the distribution of flower colors in the population over time?

* A. The percentage of pink flowers should increase over time.
B. The percentage of white flowers should increase over time.
C. The distribution of flower colors should not change.
D. The distribution of flower colors should randomly fluctuate over time.

MC.  Which of the following is an example of acclimation?

A. Some animals' hemoglobin enzymes bind oxygen better than others' do.
* B. Some animals grow thicker coats when exposed to low temperatures.
C. Some bacteria can use the energy from sunlight to make sugars.
D. Some plant species can absorb nitrogen better than others can.
E. Some types of fungi are larger than others are.

MC.  Parasitic species tend to have simple morphologies. Which of the following statements best explains this observation?

A. Parasites are lower organisms, and this is why they have simple morphologies.
B. Parasites do not live long enough to inherit acquired characteristics.
* C. Simple morphologies have been naturally selected for in most parasites.
D. Parasites have not yet had time to progress, because they evolved recently.

MC. Which of the following is a fitness trade-off? 
A. In some hornbill species, the male helps seal the female in a tree with her nest until the young are ready to fledge.  B. Moths are the best pollinators for datura flowers, but bees are the best pollinators for orchids.  C. Some lemmings run into the sea when overgrazing threatens the species.  * D. Algal genotypes that can grow fast in nitrogen-limited environments are easier for predators to digest. 
MC. You observe that in a certain population of birds individuals with sharper beaks survive better and reproduce more than individuals with less sharp beaks.  You therefore embark on a study to see if beak shape is evolving in this population.  If you later find that beak shape does not change over many generations, which of the following would be a reasonable conclusion?

A. There is no variation in beak shape in this population.
* B. Variation in beak shape in this population is not heritable.
C. There is no differential reproductive success in this population.
D. Selection is not operating in this population
E. Any of the above would be reasonable

MC. Gazelles being chased by predators sometimes display a behavior called "stotting" -- they stop running and jump straight up into the air.  This slows them down, and seems to increase their chance of being caught.  Which of the following is the _least_ likely explanation of this behavior, based on evolutionary theory?

A. The gazelles are male gazelles trying to show females that they have good genes, so that they will have more mating success
B. The gazelles want to show the predator how fast and athletic they are, so that the predator will give up the chase and the gazelle can get back to eating
* C. The gazelles want to warn the rest of the herd of the presence of predators, for the good of the species
D. The gazelles want to see if there are any other predators hiding nearby

MC. Which of the following does _not_ provide evidence _against_ the idea of goal-directed evolution?

A. Parasites with simple genomes are descended from free-living organisms with more complex genomes
* B. Blue whales evolved gradually increasing size, starting from a time when they looked more or less like small hippos
C. Swallows evolve to have larger body size during periods of good climate, and then to have smaller body size during periods of poor climate
D. Ostriches have wings but don't fly


MC.  Juncos are birds with white outer tail feathers that the males display during aggressive interactions and during courtship displays. Females prefer to mate with males with more white in their tails. Females have less white in their tails than do males, and display it less often.  Which of the following types of selection was most likely involved in the evolution of white outer tail feathers in juncos?

A. Artificial selection
B. Stabilizing selection
C. Disruptive selection
* D. Sexual selection
E. Balancing selection

MC.  The Dunkers are a religious group that moved from Germany to Pennsylvania in the mid-1700s. They do not marry with members outside their own immediate community. Today, the Dunkers differ in gene frequencies, at many loci, from all other populations including those in their original homeland. Which of the following likely explains the genetic uniqueness of this population?

A. Population bottleneck and Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium
B. Heterozygote advantage and stabilizing selection
C. Sexual selection and inbreeding depression
D. Mutation and natural selection
* E. Founder effect and genetic drift

MC. Researchers raised 100 populations of peppered moths, starting with an equal number of homozygous white and dark individuals in each case.  After 10 generations of allowing 5 pairs from each population to breed in each generation, they found that 50% of the populations were either all white, or all dark.  What would be expected if they allowed 10 pairs from each population to breed in each generation, for the same time period?

A. About 50% of the populations would be either all white or all dark.
B. More than 50% of the populations would be either all white or all dark.
* C. Less than 50% of the populations would be either all white or all dark.
D. All of the populations would be either all white or all dark.

MC. Two frog populations of the same species live at different lakes.  They have developed slight differences in appearance, but these differences seem to make no difference to their survival or reproduction.  The differences seem to be heritable, and hybrid offspring have intermediate appearance, and seem to have the same fitness as the parent populations.  A change in climate makes the area wetter, and increases the amount of interaction and inter-breeding between the two populations.   What result would you expect?

A. Lower average fitness in both populations
B. Higher average fitness in both populations
C. Increased genetic difference between the two populations
* D. Decreased genetic difference between the two populations
E. Increased genetic drift

MC. If piperfish males invest more energy in raising offspring than females, and females are larger and showier than the males, which of the following would you expect to be true?

A. Males are more choosy about mates, and have larger variation in reproductive success.
B. Females are more choosy about mates, and have larger variation in reproductive success.
* C. Males are more choosy about mates, and females have larger variation in reproductive success.
D. Females are more choosy about mates, and males have larger variation in reproductive success.
E. Both sexes are equally choosy about mates, but females have larger variation in reproductive success.

MC. A population is observed to have a a higher proportion of homozygotes than expected under Hardy-Weinberg assumptions.  Which of the following is _not_ a plausible explanation for this difference?

A. Gene flow
B. Non-random mating
C. Disruptive selection
* D. Inbreeding depression

MC. A population is examined at a particular locus, and is found to have 30% AA individuals, 40%, AB individuals, and 30% BB individuals.  The proportion of heterozygotes in this population is

A. 15% higher than would be expected in a population at H-W equilibrium with the same allele frequencies
B. 10% higher than would be expected in a population at H-W equilibrium with the same allele frequencies
C. The same as would be expected in a population at H-W equilibrium with the same allele frequencies
* D. 10% lower than would be expected in a population at H-W equilibrium with the same allele frequencies
E. 15% lower than would be expected in a population at H-W equilibrium with the same allele frequencies


MC.  A researcher notices that in a certain moth species, some females prefer to lay eggs on domesticated plants like potatoes and tomatoes. Other females prefer to lay eggs on wild plants like Datura. In each case, the offspring grow up feeding on the plants where their mothers laid them.  The moths also tend to mate where they feed, and the researcher finds a genetic basis for preference of certain plants, based on scent, in these moths. Based on the above information, what might be occurring in this moth species?

* A. divergence in sympatry
B. divergence in allopatry
C. divergence due to vicariance
D. divergence due to colonization
E. postzygotic isolation

MC. What is meant by species _divergence_?

A. When two species are together in the same place
B. When two populations of the same species are in different places
C. When two species or populations are linked by gene flow
D. When one species evolves into another species
* E. When one species splits into two species

MC. When would you expect to see natural selection for reinforcement mechanisms (mechanisms that prevent different populations from mating with each other)?

A. When the populations are allopatric
B. When the populations would otherwise fuse over time
C. When one population has greater mating success than the other
* D. When hybrids have lower fitness when either parent population
E. Under any of the above conditions

MC. Which of the following is _not_ a mechanism that makes species divergence less likely in sympatry than in allopatry?

A. More gene flow in sympatry
B. More competition in sympatry
C. Different environments in allopatry lead to differences in selection
* D. Reinforcement is more likely in sympatry
E. None of these are appropriate mechanisms; they could all be correct answers

MC. Brussels sprouts, kale, broccoli and cabbage were all bred from the same wild ancestor.  Which of the following is supported by this fact?

* A. The wild species has a lot of heritable variation
B. The wild species has little heritable variation
C. The wild species is under strong natural selection
D. The wild species is not under strong natural selection

MC.  Your professor wants you to construct a phylogenetic tree of orchids. She gives you tissue from seven orchid species and one lily. What is the most likely reason she gave you the lily?

* A. To serve as an out-group
B. To see if it's an unrecognized species of orchid
C. To see if the lily and the orchids show all the same shared derived characters (synapomorphies)
D. To see if you were paying attention

(primates figure)

MC. Which of the groups of taxa identified on this tree is _not_ monophyletic?

A. Self-important primates (SIPs)
B. Hominids
C. Chimpanzees
* D. Apes
E. Gorillas

Use this figure for the next two questions

(ratites figure)

Ratites are large, flightless birds (cassowaries, emus, rheas and ostriches).  They are closely related to tinamous, which are flying birds.  Since I told you about ratites and vicariance in class a couple of months ago, new research has changed what we know about ratite evolution, suggesting it occurred as shown above (and challenging the story that I told you in class!). 
MC. Based on this tree, which of the following statements is true?

A. Ratites and tinamous are both monophyletic groups
B. Ratites are a monophyletic group, but tinamous are not
* C. Tinamous are a monophyletic group, but ratites are not
D. Neither ratites nor tinamous are monophyletic

MC. Based on the tree, and the information above, which of the following must be true?

A. Flight must have been lost more than once during the evolution of ratites
B. Flight must have been lost by an ancestor of the tinamous, and then  regained
C. Both A and B must be true
* D. Either A or B must be true, but we can't tell which one



---------- Forwarded message ----------
From: Jonathan Dushoff <dushoff@mcmaster.ca>
Date: Wed, Apr 2, 2008 at 10:27 AM
Subject: Final
To: Luce Lavigne <lavignl@mcmaster.ca>


Luce:

Here are my questions.  The attachment is a figure; its place is indicated in the questions.

When should I save time to proof-read these?

Thanks,

J

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. You are given data from a DNA hybridization study on a group of bacteria.  This data indicates how similar the DNA of each type is to that of each other type, but not what the differences are.  What kind of phylogenetic analysis could you do on these data?

*A. Phenetic analysis
B. Cladistic analysis
C. Parsimony analysis
D. Either A or B
E. No phylogenetic analysis can be done

MC. You find a new fossil deposit with many red algal species, but no green plant species.  What would you conclude?

A. There were no plant species present at this time and location
B. Conditions were not right to fossilize plant species at this time and location
C. There was a mass extinction event among plant species at this time and location
*D. Either A or B
E. Either B or C

MC. Which of the following statements best describes the use of the principle of parsimony in constructing phylogenetic trees?

A. We use the tree that best reflects the molecular clock
*B. We use the simplest tree that describes observed patterns
C. We use synapomorphies to identify related species
D. We use an outgroup to root the tree
E. We use parsimony to calculate the likelihood of the tree

MC. Why are shared, derived characters better evidence of evolutionary
relatedness than shared, basal characters?

A. Because basal characters are also shared by the outgroup
*B. Because no evolutionary changes are required to explain the presence of basal characters
C. Because basal characters cannot be measured as reliably as derived characters
D. Because the presence of basal characters is not due to convergent evolution

MC. The fossil record is relatively rich in organisms that lived in shallow water or mud, as opposed to the open ocean, or land.  This is likely primarily due to:

A. Taxonomic bias
*B. Habitat bias
C. Diversity bias
D. Abundance bias
E. Temporal bias

((Figure))

MC. According to the figure above, which of the following groups is _not_ a clade?

A. Hominids
B. Chimpanzees
*C. Apes
D. Gorillas
E. Australopithecus

MC. According to the figure above, which of the following is _not_ a pair of sister taxa?

A. SIPs (self-important primates) and gorillas
B. Chimpanzees and hominids
C. Chimps and bonobos
*D. Chimpanzees and gorillas
E. Humans and Australopithecus

MC. Cyanobacteria quickly became very numerous about 2.3 billion years ago. Which of their features was responsible for such success?
*A.    ability to perform oxygenic photosynthesis
B.    ability to form colonies
C.    ability to use organic compounds as electron donors
D.    ability to fix nitrogen
E. ability to digest lignin

MC. Which of the following is _not_ a possible advantage (either to us, or to the microbe) of fermentation compared to oxygen respiration? 
A. ATP may be generated more quickly
B. ATP may be generated when oxygen levels are low
*C. More ATP may be generated from the same energy source
D. Fermentation by-products may inhibit competitors
E. Tasty foodstuffs or beverages may be produced

MC. An obligate heterotroph is an organism which:

A. Must get its energy from organic compounds
B. May get its energy from organic compounds or from other sources
C. Must get its energy from inorganic compounds
*D. Must get its carbon from organic compounds
E. May get its carbon from organic compounds or from other sources

MC. Which of the following functions can be performed by bacteria, but not by protists or fungi?

*A. Obtaining energy from inorganic compounds
B. Obtaining mineral nutrition from inorganic compounds
C. Ingestion
D. Lignin digestion
E. Forming spores

MC. Scientists use enrichment cultures for all of the following purposes _except_:

A. identifying micro-organisms that can grow in particular conditions
B. growing micro-organisms to observe and experiment with
C. identifying micro-organisms that can perform particular reactions (e.g., for bio-remediation)
*D. estimating the number of different species of micro-organisms in a sample

MC. Two bacteria have the same shape, and one is twice as large as the other.  If they can move ions across their cell membranes at the same rate per unit area, which one can change its internal concentrations more quickly?

A. The smaller bacterium is four times as fast
*B. The smaller bacterium is two times as fast
C. The two bacteria are equally fast
D. The larger bacterium is two times as fast
E. The larger bacterium is four times as fast

MC. A collection of cells is considered a multi-cellular organism if:

A. The cells live together throughout their life cycle
B. The cells co-operate in a manner that increases their fitness
*C. Some of the cells forgo their chance to reproduce, to help other cells reproduce
D. All of the cells forgo their chance to reproduce, to help another group of cells reproduce
E. Some of the cells co-operate, and others "cheat"

MC. Which of the following functions can be performed by protists, but not by bacteria or fungi?

A. Obtaining energy from inorganic compounds
B. Obtaining mineral nutrition from inorganic compounds
*C. Ingestion
D. Lignin digestion
E. Forming spores

MC. Phylogenetic trees should be considered approximations for all of the following reasons, _except_ which one?

A. Sexual reproduction can combine genes from different sources
B. Lateral gene transfer can combine genes from different sources
C. Endosymbioses can combine genes from different sources
*D. Cytoskeletons can combine genes from different sources
E. Data and computational methods for inferring trees are imperfect

MC. What is the origin of modern eukaryotes?

*A. An endosymbiosis event involving an ancient eukaryote and a bacterium
B. A transformation event involving an ancient eukaryote and a bacterium
C. An endosymbiosis event involving an archaeon and a bacterium
D. A transformation event involving an archaeon and a bacterium
E. A hockey game involving prokaryotic hockey players

MC. What two phases characterize the lifestyle of sexually reproducing organisms?

A. A mitotic phase and a fission phase
B. A mitotic phase and a meiotic phase
C. A zygote phase and a spore phase
D. A zygote phase and a gametic phase
*E. A haploid phase and a diploid phase

MC. Evidence from genetic comparisons with chimpanzees provides evidence that which sort of genes in humans are under selection for diversity?

A. Genes that control gender
B. Mating-system genes that control which individuals we find attractive
C. Genes that control sexual preference (which gender we find attractive)
*D. Immune system genes
E. Genes for eusociality

MC. Which of the following roles is never performed by mycorrhizal fungi?

A. Obtaining mineral nitrogen from the soil
B. Obtaining mineral phosphorous from the soil
*C. Obtaining gaseous nitrogen from the atmosphere
D. Transferring carbon between plants

MC. Which of the following functions can be performed by fungi, but not by bacteria or protists?

A. Obtaining energy from inorganic compounds
B. Obtaining mineral nutrition from inorganic compounds
C. Ingestion
*D. Lignin digestion
E. Forming spores

MC. Which of the following strategies is _not_ particularly suited to an absorptive lifestyle?

*A. Eating whole organisms
B. Causing disease
C. Decomposing dead organisms
D. Mutualism

MC. Which of the following is a good description of large fungal structures?

A. Mycelia are compact so that they can absorb nutrition, while mushrooms are highly branched so that they can protect themselves from threats
*B. Mycelia are highly branched so that they can absorb nutrition, while mushrooms are compact so that they can protect themselves from threats
C. Mushrooms are compact so that they can absorb nutrition, while mycelia are highly branched so that they can protect themselves from threats
D. Mushrooms are highly branched so that they can absorb nutrition, while mycelia are compact so that they can protect themselves from threats

MC. Why do many plants depend on mycorrhizal fungi?

*A. Because their extremely high surface area makes them efficient absorbers of mineral nutrition
B. Because they can fix nitrogen from the atmosphere
C. Because they can degrade lignin
D. All of the above




---------- Forwarded message ----------
From: Jonathan Dushoff <dushoff@mcmaster.ca>
Date: Thu, Mar 13, 2008 at 10:00 PM
Subject: Re: Midterm
To: Lovaye Kajiura <kajiura@univmail.cis.mcmaster.ca>, Luce Lavign <lavignl@mcmaster.ca>


Luce:

Here are my questions again.  They should be the same as last time,
but I removed some leftover lines at the end, and indicated morning
and evening.

Best,

JD

SA (morning). You are asked to construct a phylogeny that reflects the
evolutionary history of four species. Compared to an outgroup, Species
1 has derived characters A and B. Species 2 has derived characters A,
C, D. Species 3 has derived characters A, C, D, E, F, G. Species 4 has
derived characters A, B and F.

a) What approach should you use to construct this phylogeny? (1 point)

ANS The cladistic approach, using parsimony.

COMMENTS Full credit for cladistic approach, or parsimony, or a
parsimonious explanation of synapomorphies.  Half credit for
synapomorphies without cladistics or parsimony.

b) Which of the traits above will be useful in inferring the
relationship between these four species? (1 point)

ANS B, C, D and F.  A is not informative because all of the taxa have
it.  E and G are not informative in a simple cladistic approach
because only one taxon has them.

COMMENTS Half a point if only one mistake is made (including both E
and G can count as one mistake).

c) What phylogeny would you infer? Hint: simplify by using the answer
from b). (2 points)

ANS ((Drawing)).  Species 2 and 3 are sisters, because they share two
synapomorphies (C and D).  There is no good way to have F evolve only
once, so we make 1 and 4 sisters so that B can evolve only once.

COMMENTS 1 point for 2 and 3 as sister taxa, one point for 1 and 4 as
sister taxa.

SA (morning). To investigate the role of endophytic fungi in plant
ecology, researchers perform a test where they grow forest plants with
and without normal endophytic fungi, and with and without exposure to
normal environmental fungi from the forest. What should they conclude
about the role of endophytic fungi:

a) if both samples with endophytic fungi have lower growth than the
other two? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes are parasitic.

b) if both samples with endophytic fungi have higher growth than the
other two? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes are mutualists.

c) if the sample with only environmental fungi has lower growth than
the other three? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes protect the leaves in some way from the effects of
environmental fungi.

COMMENTS Half a point for saying they are mutualists without
mentioning protection.  Full credit for protection without the word
mutualist.

SA (evening). You are asked to construct a phylogeny that reflects the
evolutionary history of four species. Compared to an outgroup, Species
1 has derived characters A and D. Species 2 has derived characters A,
B, C. Species 4 has derived characters A, B, C, E, F, G. Species 3 has
derived characters A, D and E.

a) What approach should you use to construct this phylogeny? (1 point)

ANS The cladistic approach, using parsimony.

COMMENTS Full credit for cladistic approach, or parsimony, or a
parsimonious explanation of synapomorphies.  Half credit for
synapomorphies without cladistics or parsimony.

b) Which of the traits above will be useful in inferring the
relationship between these four species? (1 point)

ANS B, C, D and E.  A is not informative because all of the taxa have
it.  F and G are not informative in a simple cladistic approach
because only one taxon has them.

COMMENTS Half a point if only one mistake is made (including both F
and G can count as one mistake).

c) What phylogeny would you infer? Hint: simplify by using the answer
from b). (2 points)

ANS ((Drawing)).  Species 2 and 4 are sisters, because they share two
synapomorphies (C and B).  There is no good way to have E evolve only
once, so we make 1 and 3 sisters so that D can evolve only once.

COMMENTS 1 point for 2 and 4 as sister taxa, one point for 1 and 3 as
sister taxa.

SA (evening). Researchers perform a test where they grow forest plants
with and without normal endophytic fungi, and with and without
exposure to normal environmental fungi from the forest. What should
they conclude:

a) if both samples with endophytic fungi have lower growth than the
other two? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes are parasitic.

COMMENTS Half a point for saying "pathogenic" instead.

b) if both samples with environmental fungi have lower growth than the
other two? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes are commensals.

COMMENTS Half a point for saying that the environmental fungi are
parasitic (no extra credit, though).  Death without trial for saying
the endophytes are mutualistic (that's the answer to the morning
question).

c) if the sample with only environmental fungi has lower growth than
the other three? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes protect the leaves in some way from the effects of
environmental fungi.

COMMENTS Half a point for saying they are mutualists without
mentioning protection.  Full credit for protection without the word
mutualist.


----------------------------------------------------------------------

https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/#search/lavignl%40mcmaster.ca/11cc36df7cc589d5

For heaven's sake just make GDs for this!

SA Pasted from word. I used bolding to make these better (at Lovaye's suggestion)

SA. An eye-color locus is studied in a population of people.  Two alleles are found: L is associated with lighter-coloured eyes, and D is associated with darker-coloured eyes.  The study finds that 30% of individuals sampled have genotype LL, 20% have genotype LD, and 50% have genotype DD.
a) What is the frequency of each of the alleles? (2 points)
b) Based on the allele frequencies calculated above, what genotype frequencies would be expected under the Hardy-Weinberg assumptions? (2 points)
c) How (in which direction) do the observed frequencies differ from the expected frequencies you calculated? (1 point)
d) Assuming this difference is not due to random chance, what is a likely explanation of the difference? (2 points)

SA. You are studying a new clade, and identify three derived traits: flight, blueness and singing.  Species A is blue (only).  Species B flies and sings.  Species C is blue, flies and sings.
a) Make three separate, labeled trees showing the phylogenetic relationship between A, B and C that you would infer if you looked only at one trait at a time.  (2 points)
b) Based on all the data above, what is your best guess for the correct phylogenetic tree, and why? (2 points)
c) Which of the trees from part a) differs from the one in part b)? (1 point)
d) If the tree chosen in part b) is correct, what would you conclude about the trait identified in part c)? (1 point)

---------- Forwarded message ----------
From: Jonathan Dushoff <dushoff@mcmaster.ca>
Date: Sat, Nov 28, 2009 at 10:46 AM
Subject: Final
To: Karen Haines <hainesk@mcmaster.ca>, Alastair Tracey <atracey@mcmaster.ca>, Audrey Patocs <audreypatocs@hotmail.com>, Jurek Kolasa <kolasa@mcmaster.ca>


Attached please find 30 proposed exam questions in plain text.  Jurek,
please note that you will only need 69, as Alastair gets to set the
first question (which test).

Comments and suggestions are welcome.

Karen, the words with underscores (like _this_) should be converted to
italic, please.  Let me know if you have any other questions about
typesetting.

JD

----------------------------------------------------------------------



MC. What sort of evidence would falsify the statement "All primates
have fingernails"?

* A. A primate that does not have fingernails
B. A non-primate that does not have fingernails
C. A non-primate that does have fingernails
D. A slice of pizza
E. Either A or C

USE THIS INFORMATION FOR THE NEXT TWO QUESTIONS.  A famous experiment
compared bacterial growth in broth that was boiled in short-necked
flasks and swan-necked flasks.  Bacteria grew in the short-necked, but
not in the swan-necked, flasks.

MC. What is your interpretation of this result?

A. Bacteria are spontaneously generated in the short-necked flasks
B. Some bacteria survive boiling and grow in the short-necked flasks
* C. Bacteria arrive from the environment and grow in the short-necked
flasks, but are blocked from entering the swan-necked flasks
D. Bacteria are adapted to grow in short-necked flasks.

MC.  Assume the experiment above was done carefully and correctly, as
described.  What is a possible objection to reaching the conclusion
above based only on this experiment?

A. The experimenter may have overheated the flasks
B. The experimenter may not have allowed enough time for spontaneous
generation to occur
C. The right kind of bacteria may not be present in the laboratory environment
* D. Spontaneous generation may require free air flow, which may have
been blocked by the swan-necked flasks
E. The broth may not have been nutritious enough

MC. A researcher wants to train birds to jump and to peck in response
to different stimuli.  Which of the following strategies is most
likely to be successful?

A. Reward the birds with food for displaying desired behaviors.
B. Punish the birds with electric shocks when they fail to display
desired behaviors.
C. Reward the birds when they jump appropriately, and punish them when
they fail to peck appropriately.
* D. Reward the birds when they peck appropriately, and punish them
when they fail to jump appropriately.
E. Put the birds in a lecture hall, and _tell_ them what to do, loudly
and with large arm gestures.


MC. The lifetime Darwinian fitness of one organism is greater than
that of another organism if:

a.  it lives longer than the other

b.  it is able to outcompete the other for access to resources

c.  it mates more frequently

* d.  it leaves more viable offspring than the other

e.  c and d

MC. Which of the following is an example of a fitness trade-off?

A. In some hornbill species, the male helps seal the female in a tree
with her nest until the young are ready to fledge.

B. Moths are the best pollinators for datura flowers, but bees are the
best pollinators for orchids.

C. Some lemmings run into the sea when overgrazing threatens the species.

* D. Tree species that grow the fastest in high-light conditions do
not survive as well as other species in low-light conditions

MC. You observe that in a certain population of birds individuals with
sharper beaks survive better and reproduce more than individuals with
less sharp beaks.  You therefore embark on a study to see if beak
shape is evolving in this population.  If you later find that beak
shape does not change over many generations, which of the following
would be a reasonable conclusion?

A. There is no variation in beak shape in this population.

* B. Variation in beak shape in this population is not heritable.

C. There is no differential reproductive success in this population.

D. Selection is not operating in this population

E. Any of the above would be reasonable



MC. When Darwin studied the finch population of the Galápagos Islands,
he observed a variation of beak sizes related to the size of seeds
available on their respective islands. Larger beaks were better
adapted for larger seeds, and smaller beaks were better adapted for
smaller seeds, making medium sized beaks maladaptive. This is an
example of

a.  Directional selection

b.  Mutational Drift

* c.  Disruptive selection

d.  Genetic Flow

MC. Suppose 36% of a remote mountain village can taste
phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) and must therefore have at least one copy of
the dominant PTC taster allele. If this population conforms to
Hardy-Weinberg expectations for this gene, what percentage of the
population must be heterozygous for this trait?

a.  16%

* b.  32%

c.  40%

d.  48%

e.  60%

MC. An island in the Galapagos has a resident population of marine
iguanas. Their only historical predator is a hawk which is able to
catch small and large individuals with equal ease. If rats were
introduced to the island, and preferentially attacked smaller iguanas,
you might expect to see iguana body size to__________ and the
population to be under __________ selection.

* a.  increase; directional

b.  increase; disruptive

c.  decrease; directional

d.  decrease; stabilizing

e.  stay the same; stabilizing

MC. If piperfish males invest more energy in raising offspring than
females, and females are larger and showier than the males, which of
the following would you expect to be true?

A. Males are more choosy about mates, and have larger variation in
reproductive success.

B. Females are more choosy about mates, and have larger variation in
reproductive success.

* C. Males are more choosy about mates, and females have larger
variation in reproductive success.

D. Females are more choosy about mates, and males have larger
variation in reproductive success.

E. Both sexes are equally choosy about mates, but females have larger
variation in reproductive success.

MC. A population is observed to have a higher proportion of
heterozygotes than expected under Hardy-Weinberg assumptions.  Which
of the following is _not_ a plausible explanation for this difference?

A. Gene flow

B. Non-random mating

* C. Disruptive selection

D. Inbreeding depression




MC. Which of the following is _not_ a mechanism that makes species
divergence less likely in sympatry than in allopatry?

A. More gene flow in sympatry

B. More competition in sympatry

C. Different environments in allopatry lead to differences in selection

* D. Reinforcement is more likely in sympatry

E. None of these are appropriate mechanisms; they could all be correct answers


MC. What is meant by species _divergence_?

A. When two species are together in the same place

B. When two populations of the same species are in different places

C. When two species or populations are linked by gene flow

D. When one species evolves into another species

* E. When one species splits into two species

MC.  Three populations of crickets look very similar, but the males
have courtship songs that sound different. This difference in songs
could reasonably be explained as:

A. A prezygotic isolating mechanism resulting from fusion

B. A postzygotic isolating mechanism resulting from fusion

* C. A prezygotic isolating mechanism resulting from reinforcement

D. A postzygotic isolating mechanism resulting from reinforcement

E. All of the above

MC.  Two hypothetical species of songbirds, A and B, overwinter
together in mixed flocks in Costa Rica. In spring, species A goes to
the east coast of North America, and species B goes to the west coast.
 Breeding takes place in North America in the spring and summer. What
can you say about the isolating mechanisms of these two species?

A. They must have different courtship patterns.

B. They must have a post-zygotic isolating mechanism.

* C. The two species are reproductively isolated by allopatry.

D. The two species are reproductively isolated by genetic incompatibility.

E. Reinforcement must be occurring when they winter together.


CHAPTER 26 Phylogenies and the history of life

MC. You are given data from a DNA hybridization study on a group of
bacteria.  This data indicates how similar the DNA of each type is to
that of each other, but not what the differences are.  What kind of
phylogenetic analysis could you do on these data?

*A. Phenetic analysis
B. Cladistic analysis
C. Parsimony analysis
D. Either A or B
E. No phylogenetic analysis can be done

MC. You find a new fossil deposit with many red algal species, but no
green plant species.  What would you conclude?

A. There were no plant species present at this time and location
B. Conditions were not right to fossilize plant species
C. There was a mass extinction event among plant species at this
location
* D. Either A or B
E. Either B or C

MC. Why are shared, derived characters better evidence of evolutionary
relatedness than shared, basal characters?

A. Because basal characters are also shared by the outgroup
* B. Because no changes are required to explain the presence of basal characters
C. Because basal characters cannot be measured as reliably as derived characters
D. Because the presence of basal characters is not due to convergent evolution


MC. An impala gives an alarm call when it smells a leopard.  Which of
the following is the most likely to be the _ultimate_ cause of this
behavior?

A. Direct selection for self-preservation

* B. Kin selection to help related individuals

C. Species-level selection to help other impalas

D. A circuit in the impala's brain that recognizes the smell and
triggers the behaviour

E. Imprinting on the behavior of other impalas

MC. Which of the following is _least_ likely to be a learned behaviour?

* A. Fear of falling in mountain goats

B. Fear of falling in mice

C. Avoidance of poisonous insects by birds

D. Avoidance of poisonous seeds by squirrels

E. Chimpanzees helping each other stay clean and free of insects

MC. Which of the following is _not_ a likely reason for communication?

A. Providing honest information to rivals of the same species, to avoid conflict

B. Providing deceptive information to rivals of the same species, to
avoid conflict

C. Providing honest information to predators, to avoid being eaten

D. Providing deceptive information to predators, to avoid being eaten

* E. All  of the above are likely reasons for communication; none is a
good answer

MC. What is the coefficient of relatedness (r) between a grandfather
and a grand-daughter?

A. 1/2

B. 1/3

* C. 1/4

D. 1/8

E. 3/8


MC. Anatomically modern humans spread around the world around

A. 500 kya

B. 200 kya

C. 100 kya

* D. 50 kya

E. 5 years ago

MC. Which of the following is _not_ an explanation that scientists
suggest for the spread of modern humans?

A. An evolutionary change that is not visible in fossil specimens

* B. An evolutionary change that is visible in fossil specimens

C. Gradual cultural change

D. Sudden cultural change

E. Gradual cultural and evolutionary change

MC. Since our last common ancestor with chimpanzees, humans show large
changes in protein expression patterns in which cell types?

A. Liver

B. Stomach

* C. Brain

D. A and B

E. All of the above

MC. The oldest anatomically modern human fossils are found in:

A. the Middle East.

* B. Africa.

C. Asia.

D.  southern Australia.

E. Westdale



MC. Which of the following is _not_ true?

A. Children are very efficient at learning new phonemes

B. Children are very efficient at processing (distinguishing and
understanding) phonemes

C. Children are very efficient at learning grammar

* D. Adults are very efficient at learning new phonemes

E. Adults are very efficient at processing phonemes

MC. Which of the following separates humans from other "smart" animals?

A. Humans are good at learning by facilitation

* B. Humans are good at learning by observation

C. Humans use communication to build social bonds

D. Humans groups share cultural practices

E. Humans use tools

MC. Adults in a a wine-making village are all involved in making and
evaluating wine, and are all better at distinguishing smells than
people in a nearby wheat-growing village, but some of the people in
the village are much better than others.  Which of the following is
most likely to be true?

A. The differences within the village are mostly environmental, while
those between the village and other villages are mostly genetic

* B. The differences within the village are mostly genetic, while
those between the village and other villages are mostly environmental

C. Both sets of differences are mostly genetic

D. Both sets of differences are mostly environmental




---------- Forwarded message ----------
From: Jonathan Dushoff <dushoff@mcmaster.ca>
Date: Thu, Nov 12, 2009 at 10:33 PM
Subject: Midterm questions
To: Karen Haines <hainesk@mcmaster.ca>, Alastair Tracey <atracey@mcmaster.ca>


Enclosed please find 15 midterm questions, and a short-answer question
worth 5 points.  _Underscores_ mean that words should be _italicized_.
 * Stars indicate the correct answers.

Please share any comments, concerns or questions.

Best,

JD

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. When would you expect to see natural selection for reinforcement
mechanisms (mechanisms that prevent different populations from mating
with each other)?

A. When the populations are allopatric

B. When the populations would otherwise fuse over time

C. When one population has greater mating success than the other

* D. When hybrids have lower fitness than either parent population

E. Under any of the above conditions

-----------------------------------------------------------------

MC.  A researcher notices that in a certain moth species, some females
prefer to lay eggs on domesticated plants like potatoes and tomatoes.
Other females prefer to lay eggs on wild plants like Datura. In each
case, the offspring grow up feeding on the plants where their mothers
laid them.  The moths also tend to mate where they feed, and the
researcher finds a genetic basis for preference of certain plants,
based on scent, in these moths. Based on the above information, what
might be occurring in this moth species?

* A. divergence in sympatry

B. divergence in allopatry

C. divergence due to vicariance

D. divergence due to colonization

E. postzygotic isolation

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. Which of the following is the most significant criterion for
identifying species according to the Biological Species Concept?

a.  Populations are morphologically distinct.

* b.  Reproductive isolation between populations.

c.  A strong presence in the fossil record.

d.  The smallest monophyletic group on a phylogenetic tree.

e.  The largest monophyletic group on a phylogenetic tree.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. What outcomes can occur where the ranges of two species overlap?

a.  the species will interbreed, eventually fusing over time

b.  a stable hybrid zone will form if hybrids are better adapted to
the area of overlap than either parent species

c.  species will continue to diverge and be isolated by behavioural or
genetic mechanisms

* d.  all of the above are possible outcomes

e.  none of the above is a possible outcome

----------------------------------------------------------------------
MC. Which of the following is not an example of behavior?

A. Thirsty zebras search for water.

B. Plants produce toxic chemicals to protect themselves from insects.

C. Students prepare for a biology examination by studying.

* D. Moths who live on dirty tree trunks evolve darker coloration.

E. Baby geese "imprint" on the first moving object that they see.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. Which of the following provides the best evidence that web weaving
in spiders is a stereotyped behavior?

A. Spiders do not spend enough time with their mothers to learn how to
weave a web.

B. Spiders are not intelligent enough to learn how to weave a web by
observation.

* C. A spider who is interrupted in web-weaving will start again from
the beginning, and repeat all the steps.

D. Spiders would not be able to survive and reproduce without making webs.

E. Spiders who are experimentally prevented from observing other
spiders' weaving are still able to make webs.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. Which of the following should make an organism more likely to help another?

A. Lower relatedness between the two

B. A lower benefit of helping

* C. A lower cost of helping

D. Less information available to the organisms about the situation

E. Less chance that the organisms will meet again

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. Anatomically modern humans evolved around

A. 500 kya

* B. 200 kya

C. 100 kya

D. 50 kya

E. 5 years ago

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. Why do researchers include information about mice when comparing
humans and chimpanzees to understand human evolution?

A. We first need to understand how chimpanzees evolved from mice,
before we can understand how humans evolved from chimpanzees

B. By replicating our comparisons, we reduce the possibility that our
findings are due to chance

* C. The mice serve as an outgroup, indicating which traits are more
likely to be basal

D. The mice serve as a control group, so that conditions for the
humans and chimpanzees can be as similar as possible

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. Which of the following is true?

A. The difference between random humans within a group is bigger than
the difference between random humans between groups

* B. The difference between random humans within a group is bigger
than the difference between typical humans between groups

C. The difference between random chimpanzees within a group is bigger
than the difference between typical chimpanzees between groups

D. B and C

E. A, B and C

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. Which of the following is _not_ a trait used to distinguish the
order primates from other mammals?

A. Grasping hands and feet

* B. Ability to walk upright

C. Fingernails and sensitive fingertips

D. Eyes are used together stereoscopically

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. Among nonhuman primates, inbreeding:

A. is common.

B. is rare.

C. never occurs.

D. is avoided only among siblings.

MC. Patterns of inbreeding avoidance in people provide evidence that:

A. Environment has a stronger effect on behavior than culture does

B. Genetics have a stronger effect on behavior than culture does

C. Environment and genetics interact in complex ways to produce behaviors

D. Environment and culture interact in complex ways to produce behaviors

* E. Culture and genetics interact in complex ways to produce behaviors

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. Researchers find that on average identical twins are much more
similar in height than fraternal twins of the same gender are.  This
provides evidence that:

A. There is no genetic variation in height

* B. There is strong genetic variation in height

C. There is no environmental variation in height

D. There is strong environmental variation in height

E. Shaquille O'Neal is not an identical twin

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MC. Which of the following is _not_ a cause of environmental variation?

* A. Differences in heritable traits

B. Unpredictable results of details of development

C. Differences in access to resources

D. Differences in exposure to diseases

E. Differences in climatic conditions

----------------------------------------------------------------------

SA. You are asked to construct a phylogeny that reflects the
evolutionary history of four species. Compared to an outgroup, Species
1 has derived characters A and B. Species 2 has derived characters A,
C, D. Species 3 has derived characters A, B and E. Species 4 has
derived characters A, C, D, E, F, G.

a) What approach should you use to construct this phylogeny? (1 point)

b) What feature of the data led you to choose this approach? (1 point)

c) Which of the traits above will be useful in inferring the
relationship between these four species? (1 point)

d) Draw a tree to show what phylogeny you would infer from these data.
 Hint: simplify by using the answer from b). (2 points)



https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Sm8paTuT_8_CYVjMi1tvxj9IRmI6Y-35CpKdtZgS9QE/edit
