
MC. Which of the following should make an organism more likely to help another?

A. Lower relatedness between the two

B. A lower benefit of helping

* C. A lower cost of helping

D. Less information available to the organisms about the situation

E. Less chance that the organisms will meet again

MC. Which of the following is not an example of behavior?

A. Thirsty zebras search for water.

B. Plants produce toxic chemicals to protect themselves from insects.

C. Students prepare for a biology examination by studying.

* D. Moths who live on dirty tree trunks evolve darker coloration.

E. Baby geese "imprint" on the first moving object that they see.

MC. Which of the following provides the best evidence that web weaving
in spiders is a stereotyped behavior?

A. Spiders do not spend enough time with their mothers to learn how to
weave a web.

B. Spiders are not intelligent enough to learn how to weave a web by
observation.

* C. A spider who is interrupted in web-weaving will start again from
the beginning, and repeat all the steps.

D. Spiders would not be able to survive and reproduce without making webs.

E. Spiders who are experimentally prevented from observing other
spiders' weaving are still able to make webs.

MC. An impala gives an alarm call when it smells a leopard.  Which of
the following is the most likely to be the _ultimate_ cause of this
behavior?

A. Direct selection for self-preservation

* B. Kin selection to help related individuals

C. Species-level selection to help other impalas

D. A circuit in the impala's brain that recognizes the smell and
triggers the behaviour

E. Imprinting on the behavior of other impalas

MC. Which of the following is _least_ likely to be a learned behaviour?

* A. Fear of falling in mountain goats

B. Fear of falling in mice

C. Avoidance of poisonous insects by birds

D. Avoidance of poisonous seeds by squirrels

E. Chimpanzees helping each other stay clean and free of insects

MC. Which of the following is _not_ a likely reason for communication?

A. Providing honest information to rivals of the same species, to avoid conflict

B. Providing deceptive information to rivals of the same species, to
avoid conflict

C. Providing honest information to predators, to avoid being eaten

D. Providing deceptive information to predators, to avoid being eaten

* E. All  of the above are likely reasons for communication; none is a
good answer

MC. What is the coefficient of relatedness (r) between a grandfather
and a grand-daughter?

A. 1/2

B. 1/3

* C. 1/4

D. 1/8

E. 3/8

