MC. Which of the following is _not_ a cause of environmental variation?

* A. Differences in heritable traits

B. Unpredictable results of details of development

C. Differences in access to resources

D. Differences in exposure to diseases

E. Differences in climatic conditions

MC. Patterns of inbreeding avoidance in people provide evidence that:

A. Environment has a stronger effect on behavior than culture does

B. Genetics have a stronger effect on behavior than culture does

C. Environment and genetics interact in complex ways to produce behaviors

D. Environment and culture interact in complex ways to produce behaviors

* E. Culture and genetics interact in complex ways to produce behaviors


MC. Which of the following is true?

A. The difference between random humans within a group is bigger than
the difference between random humans between groups

* B. The difference between random humans within a group is bigger
than the difference between typical humans between groups

C. The difference between random chimpanzees within a group is bigger
than the difference between typical chimpanzees between groups

D. B and C

E. A, B and C


MC. Anatomically modern humans spread around the world around

A. 500 kya

B. 200 kya

C. 100 kya

* D. 50 kya

E. 5 years ago

MC. Which of the following is _not_ an explanation that scientists
suggest for the spread of modern humans?

A. An evolutionary change that is not visible in fossil specimens

* B. An evolutionary change that is visible in fossil specimens

C. Gradual cultural change

D. Sudden cultural change

E. Gradual cultural and evolutionary change

MC. Since our last common ancestor with chimpanzees, humans show large
changes in protein expression patterns in which cell types?

A. Liver

B. Stomach

* C. Brain

D. A and B

E. All of the above

MC. The oldest anatomically modern human fossils are found in:

A. the Middle East.

* B. Africa.

C. Asia.

D.  southern Australia.

E. Westdale



MC. Which of the following is _not_ true?

A. Children are very efficient at learning new phonemes

B. Children are very efficient at processing (distinguishing and
understanding) phonemes

C. Children are very efficient at learning grammar

* D. Adults are very efficient at learning new phonemes

E. Adults are very efficient at processing phonemes

MC. Which of the following separates humans from other "smart" animals?

A. Humans are good at learning by facilitation

* B. Humans are good at learning by observation

C. Humans use communication to build social bonds

D. Humans groups share cultural practices

E. Humans use tools

MC. Adults in a a wine-making village are all involved in making and
evaluating wine, and are all better at distinguishing smells than
people in a nearby wheat-growing village, but some of the people in
the village are much better than others.  Which of the following is
most likely to be true?

A. The differences within the village are mostly environmental, while
those between the village and other villages are mostly genetic

* B. The differences within the village are mostly genetic, while
those between the village and other villages are mostly environmental

C. Both sets of differences are mostly genetic

D. Both sets of differences are mostly environmental




