
Examples posted for 2017_1

MC. What sort of evidence would falsify the statement "All primates
have fingernails"?

* A. A primate that does not have fingernails
B. A non-primate that does not have fingernails
C. A non-primate that does have fingernails
D. A slice of pizza
E. Either A or C

Use this information for the next two questions.  A famous experiment compared bacterial growth in broth that was boiled in short-necked flasks and swan-necked flasks.  Bacteria grew in the short-necked, but not in the swan-necked, flasks.

MC. What is your interpretation of this result?

A. Bacteria are spontaneously generated in the short-necked flasks
B. Some bacteria survive boiling and grow in the short-necked flasks
* C. Bacteria arrive from the environment and grow in the short-necked flasks, but are blocked from entering the swan-necked flasks
D. Bacteria are adapted to grow in short-necked flasks.

MC.  Assume the experiment above was done carefully and correctly, as described.  What is a possible objection to reaching the conclusion above based only on this experiment?

A. The experimenter may have overheated the flasks
B. The experimenter may not have allowed enough time for spontaneous generation to occur
C. The right kind of bacteria may not be present in the laboratory environment
* D. Spontaneous generation may require free air flow, which may have been blocked by the swan-necked flasks
E. The broth may not have been nutritious enough


----------------------------------------------------------------------

Other old

MC. What sort of evidence would falsify the statement "All flowering plants reproduce sexually"?

* A. A flowering plant that does not reproduce sexually
B. A non-flowering plant that does not reproduce sexually
C. A non-flowering plant that does reproduce sexually
D. A slice of pizza
E. Either A or C


MC. A researcher wants to train birds to jump and to peck in response to different stimuli.  Which of the following strategies is most likely to be successful?

A. Reward the birds with food for displaying desired behaviors.
B. Punish the birds with electric shocks when they fail to display desired behaviors.
C. Reward the birds when they jump appropriately, and punish them when they fail to peck appropriately.
* D. Reward the birds when they peck appropriately, and punish them when they fail to jump appropriately.
E. Put the birds in a lecture hall, and _tell_ them what to do, loudly and with large arm gestures.


