MC. Cyanobacteria quickly became very numerous about 2.3 billion years ago. Which of their features was responsible for such success?
*A.    ability to perform oxygenic photosynthesis
B.    ability to form colonies
C.    ability to use organic compounds as electron donors
D.    ability to fix nitrogen
E. ability to digest lignin

MC. Which of the following is _not_ a possible advantage (either to us, or to the microbe) of fermentation compared to oxygen respiration? 
A. ATP may be generated more quickly
B. ATP may be generated when oxygen levels are low
*C. More ATP may be generated from the same energy source
D. Fermentation by-products may inhibit competitors
E. Tasty foodstuffs or beverages may be produced

MC. An obligate heterotroph is an organism which:

A. Must get its energy from organic compounds
B. May get its energy from organic compounds or from other sources
C. Must get its energy from inorganic compounds
*D. Must get its carbon from organic compounds
E. May get its carbon from organic compounds or from other sources

MC. Which of the following functions can be performed by bacteria, but not by protists or fungi?

*A. Obtaining energy from inorganic compounds
B. Obtaining mineral nutrition from inorganic compounds
C. Ingestion
D. Lignin digestion
E. Forming spores

MC. Scientists use enrichment cultures for all of the following purposes _except_:

A. identifying micro-organisms that can grow in particular conditions
B. growing micro-organisms to observe and experiment with
C. identifying micro-organisms that can perform particular reactions (e.g., for bio-remediation)
*D. estimating the number of different species of micro-organisms in a sample

MC. Two bacteria have the same shape, and one is twice as large as the other.  If they can move ions across their cell membranes at the same rate per unit area, which one can change its internal concentrations more quickly?

A. The smaller bacterium is four times as fast
*B. The smaller bacterium is two times as fast
C. The two bacteria are equally fast
D. The larger bacterium is two times as fast
E. The larger bacterium is four times as fast

MC. A collection of cells is considered a multi-cellular organism if:

A. The cells live together throughout their life cycle
B. The cells co-operate in a manner that increases their fitness
*C. Some of the cells forgo their chance to reproduce, to help other cells reproduce
D. All of the cells forgo their chance to reproduce, to help another group of cells reproduce
E. Some of the cells co-operate, and others "cheat"

MC. Which of the following functions can be performed by protists, but not by bacteria or fungi?

A. Obtaining energy from inorganic compounds
B. Obtaining mineral nutrition from inorganic compounds
*C. Ingestion
D. Lignin digestion
E. Forming spores

MC. Phylogenetic trees should be considered approximations for all of the following reasons, _except_ which one?

A. Sexual reproduction can combine genes from different sources
B. Lateral gene transfer can combine genes from different sources
C. Endosymbioses can combine genes from different sources
*D. Cytoskeletons can combine genes from different sources
E. Data and computational methods for inferring trees are imperfect

MC. What is the origin of modern eukaryotes?

*A. An endosymbiosis event involving an ancient eukaryote and a bacterium
B. A transformation event involving an ancient eukaryote and a bacterium
C. An endosymbiosis event involving an archaeon and a bacterium
D. A transformation event involving an archaeon and a bacterium
E. A hockey game involving prokaryotic hockey players

MC. What two phases characterize the lifestyle of sexually reproducing organisms?

A. A mitotic phase and a fission phase
B. A mitotic phase and a meiotic phase
C. A zygote phase and a spore phase
D. A zygote phase and a gametic phase
*E. A haploid phase and a diploid phase

MC. Which of the following roles is never performed by mycorrhizal fungi?

A. Obtaining mineral nitrogen from the soil
B. Obtaining mineral phosphorous from the soil
*C. Obtaining gaseous nitrogen from the atmosphere
D. Transferring carbon between plants

MC. Which of the following functions can be performed by fungi, but not by bacteria or protists?

A. Obtaining energy from inorganic compounds
B. Obtaining mineral nutrition from inorganic compounds
C. Ingestion
*D. Lignin digestion
E. Forming spores

MC. Which of the following strategies is _not_ particularly suited to an absorptive lifestyle?

*A. Eating whole organisms
B. Causing disease
C. Decomposing dead organisms
D. Mutualism

MC. Which of the following is a good description of large fungal structures?

A. Mycelia are compact so that they can absorb nutrition, while mushrooms are highly branched so that they can protect themselves from threats
*B. Mycelia are highly branched so that they can absorb nutrition, while mushrooms are compact so that they can protect themselves from threats
C. Mushrooms are compact so that they can absorb nutrition, while mycelia are highly branched so that they can protect themselves from threats
D. Mushrooms are highly branched so that they can absorb nutrition, while mycelia are compact so that they can protect themselves from threats

MC. Why do many plants depend on mycorrhizal fungi?

*A. Because their extremely high surface area makes them efficient absorbers of mineral nutrition
B. Because they can fix nitrogen from the atmosphere
C. Because they can degrade lignin
D. All of the above


----------------------------------------------------------------------

SA (evening). Researchers perform a test where they grow forest plants
with and without normal endophytic fungi, and with and without
exposure to normal environmental fungi from the forest. What should
they conclude:

a) if both samples with endophytic fungi have lower growth than the
other two? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes are parasitic.

COMMENTS Half a point for saying "pathogenic" instead.

b) if both samples with environmental fungi have lower growth than the
other two? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes are commensals.

COMMENTS Half a point for saying that the environmental fungi are
parasitic (no extra credit, though).  Death without trial for saying
the endophytes are mutualistic (that's the answer to the morning
question).

c) if the sample with only environmental fungi has lower growth than
the other three? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes protect the leaves in some way from the effects of
environmental fungi.

COMMENTS Half a point for saying they are mutualists without
mentioning protection.  Full credit for protection without the word
mutualist.





SA (morning). To investigate the role of endophytic fungi in plant
ecology, researchers perform a test where they grow forest plants with
and without normal endophytic fungi, and with and without exposure to
normal environmental fungi from the forest. What should they conclude
about the role of endophytic fungi:

a) if both samples with endophytic fungi have lower growth than the
other two? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes are parasitic.

b) if both samples with endophytic fungi have higher growth than the
other two? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes are mutualists.

c) if the sample with only environmental fungi has lower growth than
the other three? (1 point)

ANS The endophytes protect the leaves in some way from the effects of
environmental fungi.

COMMENTS Half a point for saying they are mutualists without
mentioning protection.  Full credit for protection without the word
mutualist.

